Homework #

## CSE352 Computer Graphics

## Spring’26 Due: May 2, 2026

# Flight Simulator

In this homework, we build a flight simulator step-by-step. High level instructions are provided and you
are expected to use your knowledge of math, computer science, and computer graphics to make reasonable
implementation decisions and put the individual pieces together.
Even though both are equivalent, you are expected to achieve the illusion of flight by varying camera
parameters, not by transforming geometry.
The simulator should run in a page named simulator.html.

## Plain Terrain

A height map is commonly used to generate a terrain mesh. A height map is a function that takes in 2
values, e.g. longitude and latitude, and generates a height value, h. Write a function to generate a height
field over a given area in the xz- plane. The function would generate a grid in the given area, triangulate it,
and randomly perturb the y coordinate of the grid points within (− 2 , 2).

```
(a) (b)
```
Figure 1: (a) A triangulated grid in the xz- plane. (from Toymaker) (b) View of an example height field
generated by perturbing the y- coordinate of the grid points. (from 123RF)

Implementation Tips

- Write a function get_patch(xmin, xmax, zmin, zmax) to generate a terrain patch in an ap-
    propriate format and return it.

## Flight

Implement a flyby view of your generated terrain. This is the perspective view obtained from a plane flying
at a certain altitude (e.g. y = 3) above your terrain and facing straight ahead, i.e. parallel to ground level.
Implement mechanisms to dynamically effect the following.

- alter the bounds of the view, i.e. left, right, top, bottom, near, and far of the viewing volume within
    reasonable limits. Use the following key map.
       - 1 or Shift+1 to vary left.
       - 2 or Shift+2 to vary right.


Homework #1 Due: May 2, 2026

- 3 or Shift+3 to vary top.
- 4 or Shift+4 to vary bottom.
- 5 or Shift+5 to vary near.
- 6 or Shift+6 to vary far.
- quit the simulator. Map the Escape key to quit..

Implementation Tips

- Modifying a value beyond its allowed constraints should have no effect.

## Varied Terrain

Specify a certain height (y = 0) in your terrain as ground level. Your terrain contains greenery at ground
level and the points are colored green. Terrain below ground level is covered by water. Only the surface
of the water is visible which is colored blue. Terrain above ground level is mountainous and the points are
colored green to brown to white as the height increases. Implement mechanisms to dynamically effect the
following.

- use the key, V, to toggle the view of the terrain in the following circular order: points, wireframe, and
    faces.
- use the key, C, to toggle the coloring scheme of the terrain in the following circular order: flat, smooth,
    and Phong.

Implementation Tips

- The mapping from altitude to color could use the map_point function from previous assignments.
- The points in the points view must be large enough to be visible.
- To flat shade a polygon, apply the average color of the three vertices.

## Some Flight Dynamics

```
(a) (b)
```
Figure 2: (a) The three rotations of a plane. (from Wikipedia) (b) An example view of the terrain. Your
view need not contain the dashboard.

The orientation of a plane in flight is determined by its rotation about three axes. The rotations, termed
pitch, roll, and yaw, and the corresponding axes are illustrated in Figure 2. Implement mechanisms to
dynamically effect the following.

Last updated: 2026-04-20 22:24 Page 2 of 3


Homework #1 Due: May 2, 2026

- each of the indicated rotations, constrained to (− 90 ◦, 90 ◦). Use the following key map.
    - W, S (or lower case) for pitch
    - A, D (or lower case) for yaw
    - Q, E (or lower case) for roll

```
Constrain the rotations to (− 90 ◦, 90 ◦) and the plane’s altitude as appropriate, e.g. (2. 5 , 3 .5).
```
- increase and decrease the speed of the plane between [0, S] where S is a maximum speed of your
    choosing. Use the up and down arrows to vary speed.

Implementation Tips

- Modifying a value beyond its allowed constraints should have no effect.
- You will have to infer the changes caused by each rotation to the camera’s parameters.
- The rotation constraints ensure that the plane will never turn so much as to travel backward.
- The altitude constraint ensures that the plane will not run aground, nor will it fly up into space.
- The plane always sees ahead along its roll axis.
- The speed constraint allows for the plane to stand still.

## To Infinity

As the terrain is finite, the plane will ultimately fly out of it. Modify your implementation such that a new
terrain patch is dynamically computed and added when the plane approaches the boundary of the patch
that it is currently flying over. This way, the plane never flies out of terrain.
Implementation Tips

- You may use the get_patch function from above.
- The more you fly, the more terrain patches will be added and the more your GPU’s memory will be
    consumed, resulting in a slowdown of your simulator.
- Make sure to add appropriate patches accounting for the plane’s current flight direction.
- Ensure that the plane is never flying over empty terrain, no matter its speed or rotation.
- Instead of generating a very large terrain, load a terrain that is large enough for the current view
    and generate and add new terrain patches based on the plane’s motion as it approaches the current
    boundary.
- Instead of unloading patches from GPU memory, you can rewrite already allocated buffers. Making
    use of the fact that the flight constraints ensure that the plane will not travel backward, figure out how
    many patches you need to keep in memory at any given time.

```
——————– Happy Flying! ——————–
```
Last updated: 2026-04-20 22:24 Page 3 of 3



